.\" ============================================================================
.TH mumu 1 "February 15, 2022" "version 0.0.3" "USER COMMANDS"
.\" ============================================================================
.SH NAME
mumu \(em post-clustering curation of metabarcoding data
.\" ============================================================================
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY mumu
.B \-h|v
.YS
.PP
.\" mumu's normal usage
.SY mumu
.B \-\-otu_table
.I filename
.B \-\-match_list
.I filename
.B \-\-log
.I filename
.B \-\-new_otu_table
.I filename
.OP \-\-threads int
.OP \-\-minimum_match float
.OP \-\-minimum_ratio float
.OP \-\-minimum_ratio_type min|avg
.OP \-\-minimum_relative_cooccurence float
.YS
.PP
.\" ============================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmumu\fR is a robust and fast C++ implementation of \fBlulu\fR, a R
package for post-clustering curation of metabarcoding data, available
at
.UR https://github.com/tobiasgf/lulu
.UE .
Like its forebearer, \fBmumu\fR reads from two input files: an OTU
table and a list of OTU matches; and writes to two output files: a log
file and a file that will receive the new reduced OTU table. See the
\fIMandatory\fR section below for more details.
.SS Mandatory
.TP 9
.B \-h\fP,\fB\ \-\-help
display a short help message and exit successfully.
.TP
.B \-v\fP,\fB\ \-\-version
output version information and exit successfully.
.TP
.BI \-o\fP,\fB\ \-\-otu_table\~ "filename"
Input file containing the contingency table. One OTU per line, one
sample per column, columns are separated by tabulations. The first
line contains sample names (column names are irrelevant), and the
first column contains OTU names. Each OTU name must be
unique. Abundance values are positive integers ranging from zero to
2^64 - 1. Here is a simple example with three samples and two OTUs:
.TS H
center, tab (@);
cb | cb cb cb.
OTUs@sample1@sample2@sample3
_
A@12@9@24
B@3@0@6
.TE
.TP
.BI \-m\fP,\fB\ \-\-match_list\~ "filename"
Input file containing OTU similarities. No header line, one pair of
OTUs per line, three columns separated by tabulations:
.RS
.RS
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 4
name of query OTU.
.IP \n+[step].
name of hit OTU.
.IP \n+[step].
percentage of similarity (\fIinteger\fR or \fIfloating point\fR value,
ranging from 50.0 to 100.0 included).
.RE
.PP
For example, a match list corresponding to the OTU table above could
be:
.TS H
center, tab (@);
cb cb cb.
A@B@95.6
.TE
.PP
OTU names in the match list should correspond to OTU names in the OTU
table. Matches with OTU names not present in the OTU table are
ignored. Given a fasta file, a match list file can be produced with
\fBvsearch\fR
.UR https://github.com/torognes/vsearch
.UE
for all OTU pairs with at least 84% similarity ('\-\-id 0.84', see the
mumu option \-\-minimum_match for more details):
.PP
.EX
.RS
vsearch \\
    \-\-usearch_global file.fasta \\
    \-\-db file.fasta \\
    \-\-self  \\
    \-\-id 0.84 \\
    \-\-iddef 1 \\
    \-\-userfields query+target+id \\
    \-\-maxaccepts 0 \\
    \-\-query_cov 0.9 \\
    \-\-maxhits 10 \\
    \-\-userout match.list
.RE
.RE
.EE
.TP
.BI \-l\fP,\fB\ \-\-log\~ "filename"
Output file for OTU merging statistics (18 columns separated by
tabulations). OTUs are processed in no specific order. For a given
query OTU with potential parents, mumu will order potential parents by
decreasing similarity with the query OTU, then by decreasing
abundance, then by decreasing incidence (or spread), and finally by
names (increasing ASCIIbetical order). Each potential parent is
tested, and the search stops if parenthood criteria are matched or if
the list is exhausted. The different columns correspond to:
.RS
.RS
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 4
name of query OTU.
.IP \n+[step].
name of potential parent OTU.
.IP \n+[step].
percentage of similarity (\fIfloat\fR value ranging from 0 to 100).
.IP \n+[step].
total abundance of the query OTU (sum through all samples, \fIpositive
integer\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
total abundance of the potential parent OTU (sum through all samples,
\fIpositive integer\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
overlap abundance of the query OTU (sum through all samples where the
potential parent OTU is also present, \fIpositive integer\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
overlap abundance of the potential parent OTU (sum through all samples
where the query OTU is also present, \fIpositive integer\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
incidence of the query OTU (number of samples where the query OTU is
present, \fIpositive integer\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
incidence of the potential parent OTU (number of samples where the
potential parent OTU is present, \fIpositive integer\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
incidence of the potential parent OTU (number of samples where both
the potential parent OTU and the query OTU are present, \fIpositive
integer\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
smallest abundance ratio (for each sample, compute the abundance of
the potential parent OTU divided by the abundance of the query OTU,
find the smallest value, \fIfloat\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
sum of the abundance ratios (\fIpositive integer\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
average value of abundance ratios (\fIfloat\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
smallest non-null abundance ratio (exclude ratios for samples where
the query OTU is present but not the potential parent OTU,
\fIfloat\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
average value of non-null abundance ratios (exclude ratios for samples
where the query OTU is present but not the potential parent OTU,
\fIfloat\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
largest ratio value (\fIfloat\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
relative co-occurence value (number of samples where both the
potential parent OTU and the query OTU are present divided by the
number of samples where the query OTU is present, \fIfloat\fR).
.IP \n+[step].
status: 'accepted' or 'rejected'. The potential parent OTU is either
accepted as a parent, or rejected.
.RE
.PP
Abundance and incidence values in the log file correspond to the
values in the original input table. Abundance and incidence values can
be updated only when the whole dataset has been processed and all
potential parents are known.
.PP
Also, to avoid circular linking among OTUs with the same abundance
values, merging is only possible with parent OTUs that are strictly
more abundant than the query OTU. For instance, OTUs of abundance one
can only be merged with OTUs of abundance > 1.
.RE
.TP
.BI \-n\fP,\fB\ \-\-new_otu_table\~ "filename"
Output file for the newly computed contingency table. Same format as
the input OTU table (see \-\-otu_table). Sample order is unchanged,
but OTUs are reordered by decreasing abundance, then by decreasing
incidence value (or spread), and finally by OTU name (increasing
ASCIIbetical order). Note that abundance and incidence values are
recomputed: an OTU found to derive from a 'parent' OTU does not appear
in the new OTU table, and its abundance values are added to the
abundance values of its parent OTU (same thing for the incidence).
.PP
.\" .B \-\-
.\" delimit the option list. Later arguments, if any, are treated as
.\" operands even if they begin with '\-'. For example, 'swarm \-\-
.\" \-file.fasta' reads from the file '\-file.fasta'.
.\" This is a POSIX requirement for all utilities
.\" (see POSIX chapter 12.02, guideline 10).
.LP
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Optional
.TP 9
.BI \-a\fP,\fB\ \-\-minimum_match\~ "positive float"
minimum similarity percentage threshold between an OTU and its
potential parent. Similarity is defined as the edit distance between
the two aligned sequences: matching columns divided by the alignment
length. If the similarity percentage between a query OTU and a
potential parent OTU is strictly smaller than the 'minimum_match'
value, then the potential parent OTU is rejected. Accepted values
range from 50 to 100, and the default value is 84.0.
.TP
.BI \-b\fP,\fB\ \-\-minimum_ratio_type\~ "min|avg"
method used to decide if a potential parent OTU must be rejected based
on abundance ratios (threshold is controlled by the option
\-\-minimum_ratio). Decision can be based on the \fIminimum\fR
observed ratio ('min') or the \fIaverage\fR of observed ratios
('avg'). Default method is 'min'.
.TP
.BI \-c\fP,\fB\ \-\-minimum_ratio\~ "positive float"
minimum or average abundance ratio observed between a potential parent
OTU and a query OTU (method is controlled by the option
\-\-minimum_ratio_type). For each sample where both the potential
parent OTU and the query OTU are present, the local abundance of the
potential parent OTU is divided by the local abundance of the query
OTU. If the minimum or average observed value is smaller or equal to
the 'minimum_ratio' value, then the potential parent OTU is
rejected. Any positive value greater than zero is accepted, and the
default value is 1.0.
.TP
.BI \-d\fP,\fB\ \-\-minimum_relative_cooccurence\~ "positive float"
minimum incidence ratio observed between a potential parent OTU and a
query OTU. The relative cooccurence ratio is computed as the number of
samples where both the potential parent OTU and the query OTU are
present divided by the number of samples where the query OTU is
present. A potential parent OTU is rejected if its relative
cooccurence is strictly smaller than
the 'minimum_relative_cooccurence'. Values greater than zero and up to
one are accepted, and the default value is 0.95.
.TP
.BI \-t\fP,\fB\ \-\-threads\~ "positive integer"
multithreading is not activated. This option has no effect, mumu
always uses one thread.
\" Number of computation threads to use. Values between 1 and 256 are
\" accepted, but we recommend to use a number of threads lesser or equal
\" to the number of available CPU cores. Default number of threads is 1.
.LP
.\" ============================================================================
.\" .SH EXAMPLES
.\" Give an example?
.\" ============================================================================
.\" .SH LIMITATIONS
.\" List known limitations or bugs.
.\" ============================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Concept and R implementation by Tobias Guldberg Frøslev, C++
implementation by Frédéric Mahé.
.\" ============================================================================
.SH CITATION
Frøslev, T. G., Kjøller, R., Bruun, H. H., Ejrnæs, R., Brunbjerg,
A. K., Pietroni, C., & Hansen, A. J. (2017). Algorithm for
post-clustering curation of DNA amplicon data yields reliable
biodiversity estimates. \fINature Communications\fR, 8(1), 1188
.UR https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-017-01312-x
.UE .
.\" ============================================================================
.SH KNOWN DIFFERENCES WITH LULU
mumu fixes what I think to be a bug in lulu: parent OTUs with a
cooccurence ratio below 1.0 (i.e. missing from some samples) are all
eliminated, even if the default threshold is 0.95, which should allow
the parent OTU to be missing from 5% of the samples
.UR https://github.com/tobiasgf/lulu/issues/8
.UE .
.PP
Contrary to lulu, mumu allows chained merges. When an OTU B is merged
with an OTU A, lulu removes B from the pool of potential parents. With
mumu, B remains available as potential parent for a less abundant OTU
C, allowing the formation of a chain (C -> B -> A).
.\" ============================================================================
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Submit suggestions and bug-reports at
.UR https://github.com/frederic-mahe/mumu/issues
.UE ,
send a pull request at
.UR https://github.com/frederic-mahe/mumu/pulls
.UE ,
or compose a friendly or curmudgeonly e-mail to
.MT frederic.mahe@cirad.fr
Frédéric Mahé
.ME .
.\" ============================================================================
.SH AVAILABILITY
Source code available at
.UR https://github.com/frederic-mahe/mumu
.UE .
.\" ============================================================================
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2020-2022 Frédéric Mahé
.PP
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
License, or any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU
Affero General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public
License along with this program.  If not, see
.UR http://www.gnu.org/licenses/
.UE .
.PP
.\" ============================================================================
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBlulu\fR, a R package for post-clustering curation of metabarcoding
data, available at
.UR https://github.com/tobiasgf/lulu
.UE ;
\fBswarm\fR, a robust and extremely fast clustering method, available
at
.UR https://github.com/torognes/swarm
.UE ; and
\fBvsearch\fR, a versatile open-source tool for metagenomics, available at
.UR https://github.com/torognes/vsearch
.UE .
.PP
.\" ============================================================================
.SH VERSION HISTORY
New features and important modifications of \fBmumu\fR (short lived
or minor bug releases may not be mentioned):
.RS
.TP
.BR v1.0\~ "released March 1st, 2022"
First public release.
.LP
.\" ============================================================================
.\" NOTES
.\" visualize and output to pdf
.\" man -l mumu.1
.\" man -t <(sed -e 's/\\-/-/g' ./mumu.1) | ps2pdf -sPAPERSIZE=a4 - > mumu_manual.pdf
.\"
.\" INSTALL (sysadmin)
.\" gzip -c mumu.1 > mumu.1.gz
.\" mv mumu.1.gz /usr/share/man/man1/
